precise_pre_release_cargo_update (#1)
eopb/rfcs: text/0000-precise-pre-release-dependencies.md

- Feature Name: precise_pre_release_cargo_update
- Start Date: (fill me in with today's date, YYYY-MM-DD)
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This RFC proposes extending `cargo update` to allow updates to pre-release versions when requested with `--precise`.
For example, a `cargo` user would be able to call `cargo update -p dep --precise 0.1.1-pre0` as long as the version of `dep` requested by their project and its dependencies are semver compatible with `0.1.1`.
This effectively splits the notion of compatibility in `cargo`.

> A pre-release version may considered compatible when `--precise`ly stated but will not be updated to automatically via a basic `cargo update`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A pre-release version may be considered compatible when `--precise`ly is stated explicitly but it will not be automatically updated via a basic `cargo update`.
```

Author: Thanks for pointing this line out. I updated it in a slightly different way https://github.com/eopb/rfcs/commit/f5a1e9ff49979db29321362a1986b08c6e467345

Unfortunately, since `dep = "0.1.0"` is a transitive dependency of several dependencies of the large project, `cargo` refuses the upgrade, stating that `0.1.1-pre0` is incompatible with `0.1.0`.
The user is left with no upgrade path to the pre-release unless they are able to convince all of their transitive uses of `dep` to release pre-releases of their own.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

When Cargo considers `Cargo.toml` requirements for dependencies it always favours selecting stable versions over pre-release versions.
When the specification is itself a pre-release version, Cargo will always select a pre-release.
Cargo is unable to resolve a project with a `Cargo.toml` specification for a pre-release version if any of its dependencies specify a stable release.

If a user does want to select a pre-release version they are able to do so by explicitly requesting Cargo to update to that version.
This is done by passing the `--precise` flag to Cargo.
Cargo will refuse to select pre-release versions that are "incompatible" with the requirement in the projects `Cargo.toml`.

> A pre-release version is considered compatible for a precise upgrade if its major, minor and patch versions, ignoring its pre-release version, are compatible with the requirement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A pre-release version is considered compatible for a precise upgrade if its major, minor, and patch versions are compatible with the requirement, ignoring its pre-release version.
```

This can cause issues particularly in CI where jobs may have permission to fetch from a private registry but not from private git repositories.
Resolving issues around not being able to fetch pre-releases from the registry usually wastes a significant amount of time.

Another alternative would be to resolve pre-release versions in `Cargo.toml`s even when a dependency specifies a stable version.
This is explored in [future-possibilities].
This would require significant changes to the resolver since the latest compatible version would depend on the versions required by other parts of the dependency tree.
For that reason, I consider detailing such a change outside of the scope of this RFC.

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

[RFC: Precise Pre-release Deps](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3263) aims to solve a similar but subtly different issue where `cargo update` opts to upgrade 
pre-release versions to new pre-releases when one is released.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

> It would be nice if dependencies could specify their requirements for pre-release versions.

Reviewer: Could be you be more specific? I don't understand what kind of requirements you are talking about here.

Author: @mercxry 

I've tried to improve this here https://github.com/eopb/rfcs/pull/1/commits/231cf786f5b0e815d1aa41c79da45a0d411df835

Let me know if that helps?

Reviewer: Yep sounds good, left some other corrections 👍

Resolving issues around not being able to fetch pre-releases from the registry usually wastes a significant amount of time.

Another alternative would be to resolve pre-release versions in `Cargo.toml`s even when a dependency specifies a stable version.
This is explored in [future-possibilities].
This would require significant changes to the resolver since the latest compatible version would depend on the versions required by other parts of the dependency tree.
For that reason, I consider detailing such a change outside of the scope of this RFC.

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

[RFC: Precise Pre-release Deps](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3263) aims to solve a similar but subtly different issue where `cargo update` opts to upgrade 
pre-release versions to new pre-releases when one is released.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

It would be nice if dependencies could specify their requirements for pre-release versions.

Take for example this dependency tree.

```
example
├── a ^0.1.0
│   └── b =0.1.1-pre0
└── b ^0.1.0
```

> Since crates ignore the lock files of their dependacies there is no way for `a` to comunicate with `example` that it requires features from `b = 0.1.1-pre0` without breaking `example`s direct dependacy on `b`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since crates ignore the lock files of their dependencies there is no way for `a` to communicate with `example` that it requires features from `b = 0.1.1-pre0` without breaking `example`'s direct dependency on `b`.
```

Author: Woah, I need to get a spellcheck in my editor :sweat_smile:

To enable this we could extend the use of the concept of compatible pre-releases to work in `Cargo.toml`.

> This would require that pre-releases are specified with `=` and would allow pre-release versions to be requested anywhere within the dependacy tree without causing the resolver to thow an error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This would require that pre-releases are specified with `=` and would allow pre-release versions to be requested anywhere within the dependency tree without causing the resolver to throw an error.
```
